Comparing NPM (Node Package Manager) and NPX (Node Package Executor)
January 20, 2021
If you are a Node.js developer, you must have used NPM in one or many instances while developing your Node.js application. NPM is bundled with Node.js. NPM was initially released back on 12th January 2010. It has gained tremendous fame among JavaScript developers.

With the progressive growth of Node.js, NPM has introduced a new tool called NPX. Although NPX is bundled with NPM, they both treat packages differently.

This guide will help you learn and contrast the difference between NPM and NPX.

                            Table of contents
                             What is NPM?
                             What is NPX?
                             How NPM treat Node.js packages?
                             Using NPX
                             Executing installed packages
                             One-off commands
                             NPX versioning
                             Execute code from URL such as gist
                             Comparison summary
                             Final notes
What is NPM?

NPM stands for Node Package Manager. It comes pre-installed with Node.js. NPM is used to install Node.js packages to use them in our application. It makes it easier for developers to share and reuse open source code by enabling them to be installed as modules. Modules are JavaScript packages that you can install in your system using NPM. NPM helps to manage packages in your projects as dependencies.

What is NPX?
NPX is an NPM package executor. Initially, NPX was launched in July 2017. NPX was just an NPM package that could be installed like other NPM packages. Currently, NPX is bundled with NPM when you install the NPM version 5.2.0 or higher.

How does NPM treat Node.js packages?
It sets up modules such that Node.js can locate the packages and manage the dependencies of that application.

When using NPM, there are two ways to install a package into your local computer.

Locally: When a package is installed locally, it is installed in ./node_modules/.bin/ of the local project directory.

Globally: A global package is installed in the user environment path. /usr/local/bin for Linux and AppData%/npm for Windows.

When you install executables using NPM, Node.js links them either from the local or global path. NPM does not execute a package directly.

To use and run an NPM installed package, you should specify the package in the package.json file. The package.json file is created automatically when you initialize your Node.js project with npm init -y.

To execute a locally installed package, it should be specified in the package.json scripts block as shown below.

"scripts": {
    "your-package":  "your-package-name"
},

Then, you can execute the package with:

npm run your-package-name
On the other hand, you can type the package path in a command-line tool.

./node_modules/.bin/your-package-name
For example, let’s say you have installed Eslint, a tool for identifying and reporting on patterns found in ECMAScript/JavaScript code.

npm install eslint
To execute the package binaries, you have to point to the package path.

./node_modules/.bin/eslint --init
You should provide the file name as the argument to execute for the ESlint package.

./node_modules/.bin/eslint yourfile.js
NPX comes in to save a couple of keystrokes to make it easier to execute Node.js modules. It makes it easier to run and interact with executables hosted in the NPM registry and to execute NPM local binaries. It also comes with many added features.

Using NPX
With NPX, you can run and execute packages without having to install them locally or globally.

When running NPM executables with NPX, if a package is installed, NPX will search for the package binaries (either locally or globally) and then run the package.

If the package was not previously installed, NPX will not install the package in your system; instead, it will create a temporary cache that will hold the package binaries. Once the execution is over, NPX will remove the installed cache binaries from the system.

This way, your globals stays clean. This saves disk space and allows you to run a package only when it’s needed. It also gives you the advantage of testing packages without having to install them.

Let’s go over some key use cases of NPX.

Run the following command to make sure you have NPX installed using which npx.

If it’s not installed, use npm install -g NPM@latest to update NPM to the higher version above 5.2 or later, and you will have the NPX CLI tool available. You can also install NPX as a stand-alone package. Run npm i npx to install the NPX runner.

To execute a package with NPX, run:

npx your-package
Type npx --help to get a more detailed npx commands syntax.

Output:

npx [options] <command>[@version] [command-arg]...

npx [options] [-p|--package <package>]... <command> [command-arg]...

npx [options] -c '<command-string>'
Executing installed packages
When using NPM, you have to remember to type the path of the package in the command, as explained in the Eslint case.

./node_modules/.bin/eslint yourfile.js
It is tiresome to always add the node modules path, referencing them all over your files and commands.

With NPX, you can have your local packages installed and use NPX commands (instead of adding the whole path) to execute the package binaries.

npx eslint yourfile.js
This concept is commonly seen when executing NPM scripts. For example, let’s say you are using the Sequelize package to automate data migration and seed data from your project. For that case, you will need the Sequelize CLI. You will need to know where Sequelize is installed in your project in order to execute the package binaries.

For example:

node_modules/.bin/sequelize
Using NPM is pretty easy, as you just need to edit the package.json script and add the package path.

"scripts": {
    "db:migrate" 'node_modules/.bin/sequelize db:migrate'
},
To seed the database, execute the script by running:

npm run db:migrate
This may not be that hard. However, when you use NPX, things get much simpler.

Running the command below will be enough to seed the database.

npx sequelize db:seed
Why NPX over NPM scripts?
No need to edit the package.json file with node_modules paths.

You can directly execute the tool from the command line.

One-off commands
Global packages are commonly used for development purposes. For that reason, you don’t need them installed all the time. NPX helps execute these packages only when you need them. This comes in handy, as many global packages are one-off commands. You only need to run them once.

For example, to create a React boilerplate app with NPM, you need to install the Create React App module and then create an app with npm init react-app my-app.

This means that when you need to create another React app in features, chances are you will create an app using the executables that you installed previously. This rules you out of newly updated features under this package unless you update the package manually.

When using NPX, you will only run the command once without installing the package.

npx create-react-app my-sample-app
With NPX, one-off commands such as this are a lot more simple and straightforward. You need to run an NPX command once, and the app is created. When you need to create another React app, you just run the NPX command repeatedly without installing the package on your local computer.

You don’t need to worry about the package updates, as NPX will always fetch the latest version available in the NPM registry. With such approaches, you avoid clogging up your globals with packages that you use once in a blue moon.

NPX versioning
When it comes to packages versioning, NPM will handle that with the package-lock.json file. With NPX, there are more features that you can benefit from package versioning, such as:

Executing a specific package version:
If you want to execute a specific package version, let’s say, Eslint, you should specify the package version, as shown below.

    npx eslint@3.9.0 --version
Version testing:
With NPM, if you want to test packages, you have to download the packages and run them inside your project. This comes in handy when upgrading packages to newer versions. With NPX, you can determine if the new version is compatible with your project before deciding whether to update them.

For example, let’s take a Node.js project, for instance where Webpack is installed globally, and the currently installed version is 4.40.3. Webpack is used for bundling project assets. Check out this guide to learn more about configuring Webpack with your project. When configured, run webpack to get the command results.

    Hash: b41ed73s02F90S74F9b
    Version: webpack 4.40.3
    Time: 394ms
            Asset     Size  Chunks             Chunk Names
        build/main.js   7.32 kB       0  [emitted]  main
       [0] ./index.js 4.02 kB {0} [built]
Let’s try using NPX and run the webpack at version 5.11.1 to see what the difference would look like on the project. Run npx webpack@5.11.1.

    Hash: b41ed73s02F90S74F9b
    Version: webpack 5.11.1
    Time: 379ms
            Asset     Size  Chunks             Chunk Names
        build/main.js   5.62 kB       0  [emitted]  main
       [0] ./index.js 4.02 kB {0} [built]
Here, the results show that the new version will help you buddle your project further with a couple of KBs.

NPX with NVM
NVM stands for Node Version Management. It helps you to install different Node.js versions in your computer.

Moving a Node.js installation from one version to another using NVM can be tricky. NPX helps you to use specific Node.js versions without using NVM.

For example:

    npx -p node@12.18.3 -- node index.js
You can use this version to run your .js files. This becomes useful when checking the different features added in different Node.js versions.

Execute code from URL such as gist
NPX can download and run the code directly from a gist.

Here is a simple example of running a gist code. The gist has the main.js and package.json files. Check the code from the Github gist.

Let’s run:

npx https://gist.github.com/kimkimani/116e1e9d898169662fbaf6973bdbc3f5
NPX will point to the remote .js file, download it temporarily, execute it and it will give you the result in the console.

Execute Gist Code with NPX

Note, it is advised to take precautions when executing any remote files you don’t own. Always check the code before executing the files. This way, you avoid been trapped by malicious code.

Comparison summary
Here is some common comparison summary between NPX and NPM.

NPM	NPX
It is a Node.js package manager. Used to install, update, and manages package dependencies.	It is a Node.js package executer. It is used to execute Node.js packages binaries.
NPM is pre-installed with Node.js. When you install Node.js, you get NPM installed .	NPX binaries executors are bundled with NPM. When you install NPM version 5.2.0 or higher, get NPX installed. Or you can install NPX as a stand-alone with npm i npx.
For NPM to execute a package, you have to install the package from the NPM registry into your system.	NPX executes packages without necessarily having previously installed the package.
When executing a package, it will look for the package binaries either from the local or global installation. If not found at the end and no package will be executed.	When executing a package, it will look for them either in the local or global path. If the package is no found, NPX will take a step further. It will download and store the package binaries temporarily and then execute the package. When the execution is over, NPX will do away with the install.
For NPM to use a package, it has to be specified in the package.json under the script fold or available in the package’s executable path.	Not much of a hustle when editing the package.json script or remembering the package path. NPX executes packages directly from the NPM registry if not available on your local machine.
Due to package versioning of the NPM package-lock.json file, you must update the package to the latest version to use the latest updated package version.	You don’t have to update and install the package to take advantage of new update features or bug fixes. NPX will always execute the latest available version in the NPM registry. If you need to run a specific package version, you simply specify the version in the NPX command, and NPX will handle the versioning for you.
Final notes
NPX is a great tool that you should try out. It will help you to avoid NPM dependencies and versioning. Above all, you get to execute packages without having to install them.

I hope this guide helped you understand the differences between NPM and NPX and understand some major use cases of NPX.
